\documentclass[lnbip]{svmultln}

\usepackage{makeidx}
\usepackage{graphicx}
\usepackage{url}

\newcommand{\footnoteremember}[2]{
  \footnote{#2}
  \newcounter{#1}
  \setcounter{#1}{\value{footnote}}
}
\newcommand{\footnoterecall}[1]{
  \footnotemark[\value{#1}]
} 

\begin{document}

\mainmatter

\title{Open Source and Agile Methods:\\Two worlds closer than it
  seems}

\titlerunning{Open Source and Agile Methods}

\author{}
% \author{Hugo Corbucci\inst{1} and Alfredo Goldman\inst{1}}

% \authorrunning{Hugo Corbucci et al.}

% \tocauthor{Hugo Corbucci, Alfredo Goldman}

\institute{}
% \institute{Instituto de Matem\'{a}tica e Estat\'{i}stica (IME)\\
%   Universidade de S\~{a}o Paulo (USP) - Brazil\\
%   \email{corbucci@ime.usp.br} and \email{gold@ime.usp.br} }
 
\maketitle

\begin{abstract}
  Agile methods and open source software communities have different
  approaches to produce high quality and successful software. However
  each approach excels in different scenarios and is not easily ported
  to a different environment.

  This work presents an analysis of the proximity of the agile
  community and the open source community as basis for the
  elaboration of two surveys. Each survey was directed to one of the
  communities and aimed to identify communication issues encountered
  in each environment. The results of those surveys provide an insight
  to the greatest problems faced in each environment and the
  approaches that could be used to solve them.

  \keywords{agile software development, open source software,
    distributed agile, free software, software libre }
\end{abstract}

\section{Introduction}

Typical Open Source (OS) projects (the scope of OS project will be
narrowed according to Section \ref{sec:scope}) usually receive the
collaboration of many geographically distant
people~\cite{report:dempsey1999}. At first glance, this argument could
indicate that such projects are not candidates for the use of agile
methods since some basic values seem to be missing. In this case, the
distance and diversity separating developers deteriorates
communication, a very important value within agile methods. However,
it is common to identify some principles presented by the agile
manifesto \cite{url:agilemanifesto} in many OS software
projects. Parts of the manifest such as being ready for changes,
working with continuous feedback, respecting collaborators and users,
delivering working features and facing challenges can be naturally
found in the Free, Libre, Open Source Software (FLOSS)
communities~\cite{gabriel2005}.

During a workshop \cite{conference:oopsla2007} held at OOPSLA 2007
celebrating 20 years of the publication of ``No Silver
Bullets''\cite{brooks1987}, agile methods and OS software development
were mentioned as two failed silver bullets having both brought great
benefits to the software community. During that workshop, someone
asked if the use of several failed silver bullets simultaneously could
not raise production levels by an order of magnitude. The latest work
by Russo, Scotto, Sillitti and Succi~\cite{sillitti2009} is the recent
leader of this sort of work, to which this paper contributes. We provide
an analysis of parts of the agile and the FLOSS environments to
observe if a merging between both could have benefical effects to
software development.

This work is structured as follows. Section \ref{sec:scope} defines
what is meant by FLOSS and agile methods in this paper. Section
\ref{sec:relation} shows where agile methods and FLOSS development are
close to each other and where they diverge. Section \ref{sec:surveys}
presents two surveys elaborated to try to identify communication
issues and possible tools to minimize the problems of each
community. Section \ref{sec:results} presents the results of the
survey while Section \ref{sec:conclusion} concludes and provides
suggestions for future works.

\section{Scope}
\label{sec:scope}

The FLOSS environment as well as the agile methodologies both
comprehend such a wide variety of projects, people and contexts that
it is very hard to cover all of them. Therefore it is necessary to
first define which part of each community will be analysed in this
work.
\\

In this work, we will treat any software engineering method that
follows the principles of the agile manifesto
\cite{url:agilemanifesto} as an agile method. However the text will be
guided by the most known methods such as eXtreme Programming
\cite{beck2004}, Scrum \cite{schwaber2004} and the Crystal family
\cite{cockburn2002}. Closely related ideas from the wider Lean
philosophy \cite{ohno1998} and its application to software development
\cite{poppendieck2005} will also be mentioned.
\\

The terms ``open source software'' and ``free software'' will be
considered the same in this work although there are some differences
in their specific contexts \cite{fogel2005}. Projects will be said to
be open source (or free) if their source code is available and
modifiable by anyone with the required technical knowledge, without
prior consent from the original author and without any charge.

OS projects essentially controlled by a single company fall out of the
scope of this work. The reason for such reduction of scope is that
projects controlled by companies, whether they have a public source
code and accept external collaboration or not, can be run with any
software engineering method established in the company since it can be
enforced on the employees of this company.

Considering this scope, it is important to characterize the people
involved in such kind of projects. In 2002, the FLOSS Project
\cite{url:flossproject} published a report about a survey they
conducted regarding FLOSS contributors. Their collected data
\cite{url:flossdata} shows that 78.77\% of the contributors are
employed or self-employed (question 42) and that only 50.82\% of the
OS community are software developers while 24.76\% do not earn their
main income with software development (question 10).  In addition to
those results, the survey presents the fact that 78.78\% of the
collaborators consider their OS tasks more joyful (question 22.2) than
their regular activities and 42.3\% also consider them better
organized (question 22.4). As an outcome of those results, we could
say that OS contributors perceive their activities both pleasurable
and effective.

% TODO Rever essas porcentagem para trocar por algo mais interessante

Another survey \cite{reis2003} points out that 74\% of open source
projects have teams with up to 5 people and 62\% of the contributors
work with each other over the Internet and have never met physically.

Considering such characterization of the FLOSS community, the next
section presents the relation between such development environment
with the ideas and guidelines of agile methodologies.

\section{How closely related are Open source and Agile?}
\label{sec:relation}

In Martin Fowler's first version of ``The New Methodology''
\cite{url:fowler2000orig}, OSS development as part of the new
methodology of software development along with now well known agile
methods. Fowler decided to remove it from the final article because
the FLOSS environment is so big and spread that any attempt to
characterize the development process would undoubtedly fail in a given
environment.

Afterwards, in 2002, Warsta \cite{warsta2002} published a review about
agile software development methods including and discussing FLOSS as
an agile method.  However, he stresses that FLOSS development is not a
precise method and evolves differently for each project. Indeed, Eric
Raymond's description of the development process in ``The Cathedral
and the Bazaar'' \cite{raymond1999} is closer to an experience report
than to the description of a process with guidelines and
practices. Nevertheless, Raymond's text presents several actions that
could be related to the agile manifesto \cite{url:agilemanifesto} and
are common in other FLOSS projects.

FLOSS communities are, by definition, a group of people gathered
around a FLOSS project. A working and useful software project attracts
individuals to collaborate and develop the
software~\cite{crowston2002}. It is the people's interactions that
will define the development process, tools and even the goals of the
software. FLOSS projects that do not evolve to fit the needs of its
community are abandoned in a highly competitive environment where the
best (according to certain criteria) gains adopters in a thin line
between success and oblivion.

From such aspects, FLOSS projects share a lot with the values
presented by agile methods. The practices are also quite similar. Eric
Raymond quotes Linus Torvalds about two specific development policies
for the Linux Kernel~\cite{raymond1999}.
\begin{quote}
  \begin{enumerate}
  \item[7.] Release early. Release often. And listen to your
    customers.
  \item[8.] Given a large enough beta-tester and co-developer base,
    almost every problem will be characterized quickly and the fix
    obvious to someone.
  \end{enumerate}
\end{quote}

The first policy hints at an iterative and short development process
with frequent feedback input. The second one points to a large amount
of test done frequently. Those ideas are the core principles for agile
methods and largely applied to several successful FLOSS projects.
% TODO Referencias

We can, therefore, state that the FLOSS community have a culture that
is similar to the one of the agile community. Given that there is such
proximity between agile methods and FLOSS development, it must not be
forgotten, nevertheless, that the environments in which each solution
out stands are quite different.

Open source software is stronger when it comes to products that
``scratch a developer's itch'' \cite{fitzgerald2000}, i.e. a product
in which the developer can be the user. Such product evolves across
the Internet gathering volunteers interested in such development by
releasing versions of the software frequently.

Agile methods come from industry consultants with a focus on business
problems and customer satisfaction through frequent high quality
releases. To achieve such goal, an ideal agile team needs motivated
competent people closely gathered with freedom to improve their
environment and process to enable what Cockburn calls osmotic
communication \cite{cockburn2004}.

The most critical discrepancy is the one regarding
communication. Agile methods stress out that many software development
problems come from the lack of high quality communication and the best
way to mitigate it is to keep people close and in constant
contact. Open source software are inherently distributed and
frequently run by people that only meet through the Internet. Could
there be a way to bring together the strength of both communities and
improve development in distributed environments with changing
requirements?

In order to evaluate this possibility, we decided to elaborate two
surveys that will be described in the next section.

\section{Surveys}
\label{sec:surveys}

Since the motivation to build those surveys was to understand if the
agile and the FLOSS community could share more principles and
practices, one survey was directed at each community.  Each survey
intended to characterize the answering public, was available on the
Internet and spread in common channels to the target communities. The
following subsections present both surveys.

\subsection{To the FLOSS community}
\label{subsec:floss-survey}

For both surveys, part of the goal was to identify which part of the
community answered the question and how representative they were for
their community. Therefore, the first set of questions were pretty
similar in both surveys and asking participants about their year of
birth and country of residence. Both surveys also tried to evaluate
the experience of the participants in their community. For the FLOSS
community that translated into how many projects the participant had
contributed with and when did the first contribution happened.

This last question and the following ones were only displayed if the
participant had contributed to at least one FLOSS project since most
questions would be meaningless otherwise. In order to narrow the
environment that the participants would have to evaluate as well as
their experience in such project, they were asked the name of the main
project and their role in it.

To understand how the project ensures communication between its
collaborators, the participants were asked how big the project team
was and, in case there was a team (not a single person team) what the
communication channel used to communicate among them was. The survey
also asked the participant to evaluate the quality of communication
through that channel and included a similar question regarding the
communication channel with the users of the project and its evaluated
quality.

At last, the survey inquired which of the eight tools the project had
already used and how they would classify the usefulness of those tools
to mitigate their problem with the project development.

A paper version of the survey can be found in Appendix
\ref{appendix:a}.\footnoteremember{onlineoff}{The online address of
  the survey was omitted according to the submission rules}
% while the online version can be accessed at {\tt
%   http://www.ime.usp.br/~corbucci/floss-survey}.

The survey was announced via twitter\footnote{http://twitter.com} by
the authors and received the support of
GitHub\footnote{http://github.com} who asked their users to fill in
the survey.  The survey was also sent to other FLOSS project hosting
systems such as SourceForge.net, LaunchPad.net, CodeHaus, Google Code
but none answered the request or provided any sort of answers. It was
also published in a few blogs related to the FLOSS community and some
international mailing lists.

\subsection{To the Agile community}
\label{subsec:agile-survey}

The beginning of the survey directed at the agile community was very
similar to the one sent to the FLOSS community since its goal was to
characterize the participants.  After the first questions regarding
the country of residence and the year of birth, the agile survey
inquired the participants about how many agile projects they had
participated in and when was their first agile project was.

Similarly to the FLOSS survey, this last question as well as the
following were only displayed to participants who had been in at least
one agile project. The survey kept on asking about the participant's
main role in the project and the size of the team involved. The
participant was then asked to inform the main communication channel
used with the client of that project as well as the quality of
communication on that channel.

Unlike the FLOSS survey, the next question inquired whether the
participant had had any previous experience with applying agile
methods in a distributed environment. If so, the participant was asked
to describe the communication channel used in this distributed project
and its quality.

The participants were then asked to sort the three most critical
problems encountered in the agile environment in which they had
participated. Afterwards the participant had to sort the top three
tools (out of eight) that would help in a distributed agile
environment.

Finally, the participants were asked if they were FLOSS contributors
and, if so, how agile they considered their FLOSS project and how
they would sort the problems and tools in that FLOSS environment.

The paper version of this survey can be found in Appendix
\ref{appendix:b}.\footnoterecall{onlineoff}
% while the online version can be found at {\tt
%   http://www.ime.usp.br/~corbucci/agile-survey}.

This survey was announced in mailing lists related to the subject as
well as blogs and twitter by various supporters. The authors also
sought the support from the Agile Alliance but no answer was provided.

\section{Survey results}
\label{sec:results}

The surveys were elaborated to be answered online by the participants
and used some dynamic contents to minimize the amount of answers each
participants should provide. Such work was performed through
Javascript but was not validated against older browsers such as
Internet Explorer 6 and 7. Trying to answer the surveys using those
browsers resulted in an invalid answer. This unexpected error provided
extra information regarding the browser used by each community. The
following subsections analyse the data of each survey.

\subsection{Individual results from the FLOSS community}
\label{subsec:floss-results}

The results for the FLOSS survey were collected between 2009/07/28 and
2009/11/01. The survey received 309 entries from which 3 were
duplicated data (same IP address and time entry) while 4 others were
invalid (caused by Javascript errors). This data shows that about 1\%
of people connected with FLOSS communities use browsers which are
incompatible with the current standards.

Out of those 302 valid entries, 122 were answers in which the
participant never contributed to a FLOSS project but felt as part of
the FLOSS community. Such attitude shows that only about 60\% of the
FLOSS community actually contributes with projects.

\begin{figure}[htb]
  \begin{minipage}[t]{0.5\linewidth}
    \includegraphics[scale=0.8]{floss-world.pdf}
    \caption{FLOSS answers in the world}
    \label{fig:floss-world}
  \end{minipage}
  \begin{minipage}[t]{0.5\linewidth}
    \includegraphics[scale=0.8]{floss-income.pdf}
    \caption{Main income origin for FLOSS participants}
    \label{fig:floss-income}
  \end{minipage}
\end{figure}

The analysis was performed over the 180 answers left since they
provided more interesting data. Figure \ref{fig:floss-world}
represents the distribution of the answers around the globe. Figure
\ref{fig:floss-income} shows the main income origin of the
participants. It is interesting to notice that those data do not
divert that much from the results collected from the FLOSS project
mentioned previously in Section \ref{sec:scope}.

The average age of the participants was 28 years old and the average
year of first FLOSS contribution was 2003. Figure
\ref{fig:floss-firstxp} shows that younger participants started
contributing earlier in their life than older ones which can be
explained by the increasing ease to get in touch with a computer in
the last years.

\begin{figure}[htb]
  \centering
  \includegraphics[scale=.9]{floss-firstxp.pdf}
  \caption{Age of first FLOSS contribution by year of birth}
  \label{fig:floss-firstxp}
\end{figure}
% TODO Melhorar gráfico de idades de contribuição inicial

About two thirds of the participants were project maintainers,
commiters or programmers. The last third was partitioned between other
roles as shows Figure \ref{fig:floss-roles}. Team sizes were also
fairly representative since only 6\% of the project were single person
team while 48\% were up to 6 team members. Figure
\ref{fig:floss-teams} shows those results and the reported team
sizes. It is interesting to notice that such profile is similar to the
one described by Reis \cite{reis2003} obtained in 2003.

\begin{figure}[htb]
  \begin{minipage}[t]{0.5\linewidth}
    \includegraphics[scale=0.8]{floss-roles.pdf}
    \caption{Distribution of participant's roles}
    \label{fig:floss-roles}
  \end{minipage}
  \begin{minipage}[t]{0.5\linewidth}
    \begin{flushright}
      \includegraphics[scale=0.65]{floss-teams.pdf}
      \caption{FLOSS projects reported team sizes}
      \label{fig:floss-teams}
    \end{flushright}
  \end{minipage}
\end{figure}

Regarding the main communication channels, it seems they have changed
little since the FLOSS world or Reis' research. The main communication
channels with the rest of the team are still mailing lists (27\%) and
Internet Relay Chat (IRC - 23\%). However the amount of people using
face to face communication within the team shows some increase (now at
15\%).

The evaluated quality of communication in those channels was fairly
similar. Mailing lists were evaluated to be 44\% effective against
52\% for IRC channels and 49\% for face to face. It seems that with
the growing adoption of fast feedback channels over the Internet,
mailing lists are showing signs of weakness comparing to higher
bandwidth channels.

When it comes to communication with the users, mailing lists were the
most used (32\%) followed by websites (18\%) and IRC channels, e-mails
and issue trackers (11\% each). When it comes to quality of
communication in such channels, IRC channels scores once again with
49\% effectiveness against 44\% for mailing lists, 37\% for websites,
33\% for issue tracker and only 23\% for e-mails.

For both environments, other communication channels were omitted since
there were too few answers to show any significant data.

\begin{figure}[htb]
  \centering
  \includegraphics{floss-tools.pdf}
  \caption{FLOSS answers regarding tools usefulness}
  \label{fig:floss-tools}
\end{figure}

Figure \ref{fig:floss-tools} shows the top three choices of most
useful tools within a FLOSS project. Automatic e-mail/message on build
failure was considered the most useful tool by large followed by a
dynamic roadmap status from the issue tracking system and issue
tracking management from repository commit logs.

\begin{figure}[hbt]
  \centering
  \includegraphics[scale=.8]{floss-existingtools.pdf}
  \caption{Tool participants already use in their FLOSS project}
  \label{fig:floss-existingtools}
\end{figure}

Figure \ref{fig:floss-existingtools} shows that a reasonable amount of
project already have automatic e-mail/message on build failure and
issue track management from repository commit logs.  However, we
should be aware that Github offers a feature to manage the issue
tracking system from repository commit logs while many other forges
don't. And since Github officially announced the survey, it is
probable that many of their users answered the survey. Therefore the
sample could be biased in such sense.

\subsection{Individual results from the Agile community}
\label{subsec:agile-results}

The results for the survey directed at the agile community were
collected between 2009/10/01 and 2009/12/01. It received 204 answers
from which 9 were duplicate entries and 34 were invalid due to the use
of incompatible browsers. Such data shows us that about 18\% of the
agile community still use browsers incompatible with Javascript
standards. Sensibly more people than in the FLOSS community.

Out of those 161 valid answers, only 28 were from people who had never
actually participated in an agile project but considered themselves as
agile practitioners. Another fairly different result from the FLOSS
community. The agile community seems to value ``hands on'' experience
much more than the FLOSS community.

\begin{figure}[htb]
  \begin{minipage}[t]{0.5\linewidth}
    \includegraphics[scale=0.5]{agile-world.pdf}
    \caption{Answers to the agile survey by region of the world}
    \label{fig:agile-world}
  \end{minipage}
  \begin{minipage}[t]{0.5\linewidth}
    \includegraphics[scale=0.5]{agile-xp.pdf}
    \caption{Number of agile projects experience of the participants}
    \label{fig:agile-xp}
  \end{minipage}
\end{figure}

However it is not a very deep experience since 51\% of the
participants were involved in at most 2 agile projects and only 23\%
had more than 5 agile projects experience.  For the rest of the
analysis, participants without any agile experience will not be
counted since they provide little useful data.

Most participants with some experience only had a very recent contact
with agile projects. Figure \ref{fig:agile-distributed} shows that the
first experience with agile for most participants only happened after
2006. We can also see that there is a fairly regular amount of people
with distributed agile experience regardless of the year of first
agile experience which suggests there has not been a major increase on
distributed agile projects.

\begin{figure}[htb]
  \begin{minipage}[t]{0.55\linewidth}
    \centering
    \includegraphics[scale=.45]{agile-distributed.pdf}
    \caption{Distributed agile experience according to the year of the
      first agile experience}
    \label{fig:agile-distributed}
  \end{minipage}
  \begin{minipage}[t]{0.45\linewidth}
    \centering
    \includegraphics[scale=.45]{agile-roles.pdf}
    \caption{Roles description in the agile community}
    \label{fig:agile-roles}
  \end{minipage}
\end{figure}

Figure \ref{fig:agile-roles} shows that most participants considered
themselves programmers which contrasts with the variety of roles
accumulated in the FLOSS survey. Such indication can be a consequence
of the ``Whole team'' practice advocated by Kent Beck~\cite{beck2004}
in which he states that a good XP team does not have fixed roles but
rather adapt to extract the best of each member so that anyone can
perform any task if they are the best ones to do it. With such
practice, members of an agile team are just developers that contribute
to the project which can justify the smaller number of roles
described.

When it comes to team sizes, smaller teams are obviously
preferred. 37\% of the participants reported to work with an average
team size between 1 and 5 people. 46\% reported to have teams from 6
to 10 people, 13\% worked with 11 to 20 people and only 4\% reported
to work with more than 20 people. This shows that agile teams are
still small teams following the original suggestions.

About 70\% of those teams have face to face communication with their
clients and evaluate the quality of such communication around
67\%. E-mails, issue tracking systems and telephones accumulate
another 19\% of the teams' communication with their clients with only
54\%, 50\% and 35\% effectiveness respectively. The rest of the
channels are not used enough to provide trusted data.

In distributed environments, the results show that there is no clear
consensus regarding the best communication channel within the
team. There is no clearly most used communication channel nor a
clearly most effective one. However, there is a clearly less effective
one. E-mails share a reasonable part of the experiences but are rated
around 31\% effective to communicate between distributed teams which
ranks way below most reported channels.

The ineffectiveness of this communication channel can explain why 56\%
of the participants stated that ``discovering what the users/clients
need/want'' is the biggest problem they face in their agile
projects. The second greatest problem is to ``synchronize with other
collaborators to achieve a common goal'' and to ``discover what is the
next task to be done is''.

\begin{figure}[hbt]
  \centering
  \includegraphics[scale=.8]{agile-tools.pdf}
  \caption{Most useful tools to agile practitioners}
  \label{fig:agile-tools}
\end{figure}

Regarding the useful tools to help agile practitioners, the results
are very similar to the ones listed by FLOSS contributors. The most
useful tools for agile practitioners are exactly the same as for FLOSS
contributors. Messages warning of build failures lead the ranking
followed by dynamic roadmaps and issue tracking management from commit
logs.

It is no surprise that for the 35\% of agilists who contribute to
FLOSS projects, the problems encountered in their FLOSS environments
are the same as in their agile environment. The tools to mitigate
their FLOSS problems are also the exact same ones from the agile
enviroment. However, such similarity does not come from the fact that
the projects in which agilists contribute are agile. In average, the
participants graded their FLOSS project to be only 56\% agile. Such
non agility with the similar results might indicate that agility and
FLOSS development have the same unsolved problems.

\section{Conclusion}
\label{sec:conclusion}

Although a thoughtful analysis pictures agile software development
closely related to open source software development, the results of
the surveys indicate that the communities themselves are not that
close to each other. However the mindset is quite similar since
members of both communities identify the same issues and evaluate
tools in a similar way. Such results indicate that there is a strong
common root to both movements but there still is a considerable effort
to be made to bring the movements closer.

When it comes to the tools still missing, both communities share the
same issues and hope to facilitate integration between developers and
increase the frequency of feedback input. Both FLOSS and agile
projects should indicate better results by using fast feedback
communication channels such as face to face encounters or IRC channels
instead of slower channels such as simple e-mails to communicate
within the development team.

Finally, this study showed that members of the FLOSS community as well
as the agile community face the same issues and share a common view of
possible solutions. This indicates that although bringing these two
movements together is far from easy, there is no major cultural impact
in this path.

Future work could study how to apply agile techniques, such as
planning games and story writing, in FLOSS environments. Another idea
could be to evaluate FLOSS projects according to the agility of the
tools used. This evaluation could help discover the impact of tools
that facilitate agile practices on the quality and success of the
projects.

% \subsubsection*{Ackowledgments.}

% This work was supported by the QualiPSo project \cite{url:qualipso}.

\begin{thebibliography}{5}

\bibitem{report:dempsey1999} Dempsey, B. and Weiss, D. and Jones,
  P. and Greenberg, J.: A quantitative profile of a community of open
  source Linux developers (1999)

\bibitem{url:agilemanifesto} Beck, K. and Cockburn, A. and Cunningham,
  W. and Fowler, M. and Schwaber, K. and al.: Manifesto for Agile
  Software Development, http://agilemanifesto.org (2001)

\bibitem{conference:oopsla2007} Mancl, D. and Fraser, S. and Opdyke,
  W.: No silver bullet: a retrospective on the essence and accidents
  of software engineering (2007)

\bibitem{brooks1987} Brooks, F.: No Silver Bullet: Essence and
  Accidents of Software (1987)

\bibitem{gabriel2005} Goldman, R. and Gabriel, R.: Innovation Happens
  Elsewhere: Open Source as Business Strategy (2005)

\bibitem{sillitti2009} Russo, B. and Scotto, M. and Sillitti, A. and
  Succi, G.: Agile Technologies in Open Source Development (2009)

\bibitem{beck2004} Beck, K. and Andres, C.: Extreme Programming
  Explained: Embrace Change (2004)

\bibitem{schwaber2004} Schwaber, K.: Agile Project Management with
  Scrum (2004)

\bibitem{cockburn2002} Cockburn, A.: Agile Software Development (2002)

\bibitem{ohno1998} Ohno, T.: Toyota Production System: Beyond
  Large-Scale Production (1998)

\bibitem{poppendieck2005} Poppendieck, T. and Poppendieck, M.:
  Introduction to Lean Software Development (2005)

\bibitem{url:fowler2000orig} Fowler, M.: The New Methodology,
  http://martinfowler.com/articles/newMethodologyOriginal.html

\bibitem{fogel2005} Fogel, K.: Producing Open Source Software (2005)

\bibitem{url:flossproject} International Institute of Infonomics -
  University of Maastricht: Free/Libre/Open Source Software: Survey
  and Study - Report, http://www.flossproject.org/report/

\bibitem{url:flossdata} International Institute of Infonomics -
  University of Maastricht: Free/Libre/Open Source Software: Survey
  and Study - Report, http://www.flossproject.org/floss1/stats.html

\bibitem{reis2003} Reis, C.: Caracteriza\c{c}\~{a}o de um Processo de
  Software para Projetos de Software Livre (2003)

\bibitem{raymond1999} Raymond, E.: The Cathedral \& the Bazaar:
  Musings on {Linux} and Open Source by an Accidental Revolutionary
  (1999)

\bibitem{crowston2002} Crowston, K. and Scozzi, B.: Open source
  software projects as virtual organisations: competency rallying for
  software development (2002)

\bibitem{fitzgerald2000} Feller, J. and Fitzgerald, B: A framework
  analysis of the open source software development paradigm (2000)

\bibitem{warsta2002} Abrahamsson, P. and Salo, O. and Ronkainen,
  J. and Warsta, J.: Agile software development methods (2002)

\bibitem{cockburn2004} Cockburn, A.: Crystal Clear: A Human-Powered
  Methodology for Small Teams (2004)
\end{thebibliography}

\appendix
\section{Paper version of the survey to the FLOSS community}
\label{appendix:a}

\begin{small}
  \begin{enumerate}
  \item What country do you live in? \verb=_________________=
    \vspace{8pt}

  \item What year where you born? \verb=______= \vspace{8pt}

  \item How many FLOSS projects have you already contributed with?

    \verb=( ) 0 ( ) 1 ( ) 2 ( ) 3 ( ) 4 ( ) 5-10 ( ) 11-50 ( ) 51+=
    \vspace{8pt}

  \item What is the FLOSS project you mostly contribute/contributed
    with? \verb= ______________= \vspace{0pt}

  \item In which year was your first contribution to that project?
    \verb=______= \vspace{8pt}

  \item What is/was your main role in that project?
    \begin{itemize}
      \begin{minipage}[t]{0.5\linewidth}
      \item[( ) ] Maintainer
      \item[( ) ] Commiter
      \item[( ) ] Programmer
      \item[( ) ] Tester
      \end{minipage}
      \begin{minipage}[t]{0.5\linewidth}
      \item[( ) ] Documentation writer
      \item[( ) ] Bug reporter/Feature requester
      \item[( ) ] User
      \item[( ) ] Other: \verb=_________________=
      \end{minipage}
    \end{itemize}
    \vspace{8pt}

  \item Do/Did you receive any income from your FLOSS contributions?
    \verb=( ) Yes ( ) No= \vspace{0pt}

  \item If you do/did, is/was this your main income?
    \verb=( ) Yes ( ) No= \vspace{8pt}

  \item If you answered no to the previous question or the one before,
    is/was your main income related to IT?  \verb=( ) Yes ( ) No=
    \vspace{8pt}

  \item How many people work (or worked) with you on your main FLOSS
    project?  \verb=( ) 0 ( ) 1-5 ( ) 6-10 ( ) 11-50 ( ) 51+=
    \vspace{8pt}

  \item What is/was the main communication channel with the team of
    that project?
    \begin{itemize}
      \begin{minipage}[t]{0.5\linewidth}
      \item[( ) ] Face to face
      \item[( ) ] Website
      \item[( ) ] Mailing list
      \item[( ) ] Issue tracker (Trac, Bugzilla, etc.)
      \item[( ) ] Internet Relay Chat (IRC)
      \end{minipage}
      \begin{minipage}[t]{0.5\linewidth}
      \item[( ) ] Instant Message (Jabber, ICQ, etc.)
      \item[( ) ] E-mail
      \item[( ) ] VoIP (Skype, Ekiga, iChat, etc.)
      \item[( ) ] None
      \item[( ) ] Other: \verb=_____________=
      \end{minipage}
    \end{itemize}
    \vspace{8pt}

  \item How would you evaluate the quality of your communication with
    that team?

    Extremely poor \verb=---------------------------------------=
    Perfect \vspace{8pt}

  \item What is/was the main communication channel with the users of
    that project?
    \begin{itemize}
      \begin{minipage}[t]{0.5\linewidth}
      \item[( ) ] Face to face
      \item[( ) ] Website
      \item[( ) ] Mailing list
      \item[( ) ] Issue tracker (Trac, Bugzilla, etc.)
      \item[( ) ] Internet Relay Chat (IRC)
      \end{minipage}
      \begin{minipage}[t]{0.5\linewidth}
      \item[( ) ] Instant Message (Jabber, ICQ, etc.)
      \item[( ) ] E-mail
      \item[( ) ] VoIP (Skype, Ekiga, iChat, etc.)
      \item[( ) ] None
      \item[( ) ] Other: \verb=_____________=
      \end{minipage}
    \end{itemize}
    \vspace{8pt}

  \item How would you evaluate the quality of your communication with
    the users?

    Extremely poor \verb=---------------------------------------=
    Perfect \vspace{8pt}

  \item How much effort do/did you spend to keep project's information
    updated?

    Very little \verb=---------------------------------------= Huge
    \vspace{8pt}

  \item Which of the following tools does/did your project already
    use?
    \begin{itemize}
    \item[[ ] ] Automatic e-mail/message on build failure
    \item[[ ] ] Dynamic roadmap status from Issue Tracking System
    \item[[ ] ] Issue tracking management from repository commit logs
    \item[[ ] ] Website one-click release build from repository
    \item[[ ] ] Automatic metric graphic generation and updating from
      repository
    \item[[ ] ] Collaborative issue priority sorting
    \item[[ ] ] Timeline on website that allows comments to facilitate
      retrospective analysis
    \item[[ ] ] A robot on your communication channel to keep log of
      the last events
    \end{itemize}
    \vspace{8pt}

  \item Sort the tools from the most useful (first) to the less useful
    (last).
    \begin{itemize}
    \item[( ) ] Automatic e-mail/message on build failure
    \item[( ) ] Dynamic roadmap status from Issue Tracking System
    \item[( ) ] Issue tracking management from repository commit logs
    \item[( ) ] Website one-click release build from repository
    \item[( ) ] Automatic metric graphic generation and updating from
      repository
    \item[( ) ] Collaborative issue priority sorting
    \item[( ) ] Timeline on website that allows comments to facilitate
      retrospective analysis
    \item[( ) ] A robot on your communication channel to keep log of
      the last events
    \end{itemize}
  \end{enumerate}
\end{small}

\section{Paper version of the survey to the agile community}
\label{appendix:b}

\begin{small}
  \begin{enumerate}
  \item What country do you live in? \verb=_________________=
    \vspace{8pt}

  \item What year where you born? \verb=______= \vspace{8pt}

  \item How many projects you would consider agile have you been on?

    \verb=( ) 0 ( ) 1 ( ) 2 ( ) 3 ( ) 4 ( ) 5-10 ( ) 11-50 ( ) 51+=
    \vspace{8pt}

  \item In which year was the first Agile project you participated?
    \verb=______= \vspace{8pt}

  \item What is/was your main role in that project?
    \begin{itemize}
      \begin{minipage}[t]{0.5\linewidth}
      \item[( ) ] Project manager
      \item[( ) ] Team leader
      \item[( ) ] Programmer
      \item[( ) ] Quality Analyst
      \end{minipage}
      \begin{minipage}[t]{0.5\linewidth}
      \item[( ) ] Tester
      \item[( ) ] Tracker
      \item[( ) ] Documenter
      \item[( ) ] Other: \verb=_________________=
      \end{minipage}
    \end{itemize}
    \vspace{8pt}

  \item What is/was the average number of people in the agile projects
    you worked?
    \verb=( ) 1-5 ( ) 6-10 ( ) 11-20 ( ) 21-50 ( ) 51-100 ( )100+=
    \vspace{8pt}

  \item What is/was your main communication channel with the clients
    of that project?
    \begin{itemize}
      \begin{minipage}[t]{0.5\linewidth}
      \item[( ) ] Face to face
      \item[( ) ] Website
      \item[( ) ] Mailing list
      \item[( ) ] Issue tracker (Trac, Bugzilla, etc.)
      \item[( ) ] Internet Relay Chat (IRC)
      \item[( ) ] Other: \verb=_____________=
      \end{minipage}
      \begin{minipage}[t]{0.5\linewidth}
      \item[( ) ] Instant Message (Jabber, ICQ, etc.)
      \item[( ) ] E-mail
      \item[( ) ] Telephone
      \item[( ) ] VoIP (Skype, Ekiga, iChat, etc.)
      \item[( ) ] None
      \end{minipage}
    \end{itemize}
    \vspace{8pt}

  \item How would you evaluate the quality of your communication with
    the clients?

    Extremely poor \verb=---------------------------------------=
    Perfect \vspace{8pt}

  \item Have you ever been on a distributed agile project?
    \verb=( ) Yes ( ) No= \vspace{8pt}

  \item What is/was the main communication channel within that
    distributed team?
    \begin{itemize}
      \begin{minipage}[t]{0.5\linewidth}
      \item[( ) ] Face to face
      \item[( ) ] Website
      \item[( ) ] Mailing list
      \item[( ) ] Issue tracker (Trac, Bugzilla, etc.)
      \item[( ) ] Internet Relay Chat (IRC)
      \item[( ) ] Other: \verb=_____________=
      \end{minipage}
      \begin{minipage}[t]{0.5\linewidth}
      \item[( ) ] Instant Message (Jabber, ICQ, etc.)
      \item[( ) ] E-mail
      \item[( ) ] Telephone
      \item[( ) ] VoIP (Skype, Ekiga, iChat, etc.)
      \item[( ) ] None
      \end{minipage}
    \end{itemize}
    \vspace{8pt}

  \item If you had distributed agile experience, how would you
    evaluate the quality of your communication with that team?

    Extremely poor \verb=---------------------------------------=
    Perfect \vspace{8pt}

  \item For some of the common problems encountered by agile teams
    listed below, sort the 3 most critical problems in the agile
    environments you worked on.
    \begin{itemize}
    \item[[ ] ] Discover what the users/clients need/want
    \item[[ ] ] Discover what is the next task to be done
    \item[[ ] ] Understand how the project works from a technical
      point of view
    \item[[ ] ] Discover the current project status
    \item[[ ] ] Integrate the source code to the main repository
    \item[[ ] ] Keep the information about the project updated in its
      main communication channel
    \item[[ ] ] Evaluate the work done to identify improvement points
    \item[[ ] ] Synchronize with other collaborators to achieve a
      common goal
    \end{itemize}
    \vspace{8pt}

  \item Sort the 3 tools that would most help you in a distributed
    agile environment.
    \begin{itemize}
    \item[[ ] ] Automatic e-mail/message on build failure
    \item[[ ] ] Dynamic roadmap status from Issue Tracking System
    \item[[ ] ] Issue tracking management from repository commit logs
    \item[[ ] ] Website one-click release build from repository
    \item[[ ] ] Automatic metric graphic generation and updating from
      repository
    \item[[ ] ] Collaborative issue priority sorting
    \item[[ ] ] Timeline on website that allows comments to
      facilitate retrospective analysis
    \item[[ ] ] A robot on your communication channel to keep log of
      the last events
    \end{itemize}
    \vspace{8pt}

  \item Have you ever contributed to Free, Libre, Open Source Software
    (FLOSS)?  \verb=( ) Yes ( ) No= \vspace{8pt}

  \item How would you evaluate the agile level of your FLOSS project?

    Anti agile \verb=---------------------------------------= Very
    agile \vspace{8pt}

  \item For some of the common problems encountered by agile teams
    listed below, sort the 3 most critical problems in the FLOSS
    projects you worked on.
    \begin{itemize}
    \item[[ ] ] Discover what the users/clients need/want
    \item[[ ] ] Discover what is the next task to be done
    \item[[ ] ] Understand how the project works from a technical
      point of view
    \item[[ ] ] Discover the current project status
    \item[[ ] ] Integrate the source code to the main repository
    \item[[ ] ] Keep the information about the project updated in its
      main communication channel
    \item[[ ] ] Evaluate the work done to identify improvement points
    \item[[ ] ] Synchronize with other collaborators to achieve a
      common goal
    \end{itemize}
    \vspace{8pt}

  \item Sort the 3 tools that would most help you in that FLOSS
    environment.
    \begin{itemize}
    \item[[ ] ] Automatic e-mail/message on build failure
    \item[[ ] ] Dynamic roadmap status from Issue Tracking System
    \item[[ ] ] Issue tracking management from repository commit logs
    \item[[ ] ] Website one-click release build from repository
    \item[[ ] ] Automatic metric graphic generation and updating from
      repository
    \item[[ ] ] Collaborative issue priority sorting
    \item[[ ] ] Timeline on website that allows comments to
      facilitate retrospective analysis
    \item[[ ] ] A robot on your communication channel to keep log of
      the last events
    \end{itemize}
  \end{enumerate}
\end{small}

\end{document}
